## Infosheet: password leaks and re-use

Occasionally, attackers will break into a web site's server and obtain the usernames and passwords which people use to authenticate to the site. In most cases, passwords and other key details such as credit card numbers have additional protections so that an attacker would not be able to read them. Still, even some of those protections can occasionally be broken by determined attackers—or websites might have had insufficient protections in the first place. Those lists of stolen passwords and other credentials are often shared or re-sold on black markets.

This is the main reason we strongly recommend that everybody uses unique passwords for every website. If you for example used _correct-horse-battery-staple_ as your password for an online forum, along with 123@example\[.\]com as your registration email, then an attacker who broke into the forum and got access to that username-password combination would start trying it out on other sites, including your email and social media accounts. It's also possible that the website owners themselves are malicious, harvest passwords, and try to use them to log in elsewhere.

Using unique passwords is only one of the many layers of defense you should use. You should combine them with effective two-factor authentication (ideally physical security keys or passkeys), which prevents an attacker who captured your password but doesn't have your second factor from logging in on your behalf.

We recommend taking a look at [Have I Been Pwned](https://haveibeenpwned.com/), a website run by a reputable cyber-security professional which allows you check your email address against existing leaks. If your email address features in any of those leaks, it's no reason to worry: just change the password for this account to a new one, making sure that it's long and unique. Alternatively, you can just replace your passwords with passkeys if the site supports them.